.. Copyright 2013, 2014 Reahl Software Services (Pty) Ltd. All rights reserved.
 
Internationalised applications
==============================

.. sidebar:: Examples in this section

   - tutorial.i18nexample

   Get a copy of an example by running:

   .. code-block:: bash

      reahl example <examplename>


The output of an internationalised application is customised to
conform to the local customs and language of users. To enable such
customisation, a Reahl programmer writes code that take these user
preferences into account. The programmer (or someone else) also
provides translations of the user messages contained in the source
code of the application -- to different natural languages.

Rather than solving this entire topic on its own, Reahl makes use of
the `Babel <http://babel.pocoo.org//>`_ library for
internationalisation support. Glue is provided to access the features
of Babel easily, in a way that also solves the intricacies of the
component-based nature of a Reahl application.

.. sidebar:: Behind the scenes

   `Babel <http://babel.pocoo.org//>`_ is an internationalisation
   library used by the Reahl framework to deal with translations and
   all other internationalisation issues.

   Babel itself uses data regarding different locales that is derived
   from the `CLDR locale database <http://cldr.unicode.org/>`_.

The example in this section is an adaptation of the simple address
book example introduced in :doc:`uibasics`. In this version of the
example, several parts of the application have been changed purely in
order to internationalise the application. Only one bit of its actual
functionality is also changed: the application now saves the date on
which the Address was added to the database. This change in
functionality gives us the opportunity to demonstrate how to format a
date based on the current locale.


Making your component translatable
----------------------------------

A way to switch locales
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first adaptation to the program is the addition of a :class:`~reahl.web.ui.VMenu` which
will allow users to choose the locale they prefer for display. Since
we want the :class:`~reahl.web.ui.VMenu` to be on all pages of the application, the correct
way to add it is to create a :class:`~reahl.web.fw.Widget` that can be used as page
for the application, derived from :class:`~reahl.web.ui.TwoColumnPage`.

A :class:`~reahl.web.ui.TwoColumnPage` has a `.secondary` attribute to which one can add
children that will appear in the smaller, secondary column. The novel
thing here is how the :class:`~reahl.web.ui.VMenu` is constructed: by using the
`Menu.from_languages()` class method:

.. literalinclude:: ../../reahl/doc/examples/tutorial/i18nexample/i18nexample.py
   :pyobject: AddressBookPage


Displaying translated messages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The messages displayed to the user by the application are contained in
literal strings in the source code of a program. The first step
towards offering translated versions of these messages is to replace
each such literal string with a call to a special function which takes
the original string as argument, but returns a different string as a
result: a translation of the original message to the target
language. This special function is given the name ``_``
(underscore). Thus, replacing a literal string like ``'hello world'``
will result in ``_('hello world')`` instead.

Automated tools are later used to parse the source code of your
application, looking for these calls to ``_`` in order to find and
collect all the user messages so that they can be listed in a
"catalogue" where a human translator can supply the necessary
translation for each message.

In Reahl, ``_`` is not a function, but an instance of callable class,
called :class:`~reahl.component.i18n.Translator`. To make an instance of :class:`~reahl.component.i18n.Translator` available to your
code, you need to declare it at the top of each module.

Here is the top of the file containing this example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../reahl/doc/examples/tutorial/i18nexample/i18nexample.py
   :end-before: class AddressBookPage

When a human translates messages, the messages of a particular
component are translated and stored together in something called a
catalogue. Thus, when creating your :class:`~reahl.component.i18n.Translator` instance, you need to
specify the name of your component to its constructor so that the
:class:`~reahl.component.i18n.Translator` instance can reference the correct catalogue -- the
catalogue of your component.

This example lives inside the 'reahl-doc' component, and hence its
translations need to be looked up in the language catalogues of
`reahl-doc`. When you check the example out, this gets changed to
`i18nexample` -- that is what you would have put in the code if you
developed this example independently of the Reahl documentation.

The Address class contains some examples of strings meant for human
consumption that are passed through ``_`` for translation:

.. literalinclude:: ../../reahl/doc/examples/tutorial/i18nexample/i18nexample.py
   :pyobject: Address

.. note::

   The ``_`` :class:`~reahl.component.i18n.Translator` should never be **called** in module
   scope. Module scope is executed once, when the application is
   started. Looking up the translation of a message *for a particular
   user* can only happen once the chosen locale is known -- and that
   will, of course, be different for each user. Hence, such code
   cannot be done at application starting time.

Dealing with plural forms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In English, words have one form for singular, and another for
plural. In some other languages there can be many different plural
forms that differ depending on the number of items you are talking
about. To deal with such plural forms, invoke the
`Translation.ngettext` method instead. This method takes the English
singular and plural form, and the number of items in question. It
returns the correct plural form for the target language, given the
number of items.

In order to show how this is done, we have customised the heading in
AddressBookPanel to use a plural form if there is more than one
Address listed:

.. literalinclude:: ../../reahl/doc/examples/tutorial/i18nexample/i18nexample.py
   :pyobject: AddressBookPanel


Other customisations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Many other things can be done differently, depending on the chosen
locale. For all of these things, you can use the `Babel
<http://babel.pocoo.org//>`_ library directly, usually passing it a
locale string which is obtainable from ``_.current_locale`` in a Reahl
program.

AddressBox provides an example where the date is formatted according
to locale:

.. literalinclude:: ../../reahl/doc/examples/tutorial/i18nexample/i18nexample.py
   :pyobject: AddressBox


Making it possible for others to translate your component
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As shown up to now, the original author of a component merely makes it
possible for others to provide locales for the component. Babel uses
data from the `CLDR locale database <http://cldr.unicode.org/>`_ to
determine many customs relating to a particular locale. The only thing
that needs to be tailor-made for particular piece of software to
support a particular locale is a set of translations for the actual
user messages contained in the software.

Before anyone can provide a catalogue of translated versions of the
messages in your component, though, you have to create a catalogue
containing all the original versions of user messages contained in the
source code of your component. Others use this list of messages to
provide the necessary translation of each user message.

Message catalogues live in a Python package inside a component. The
first step to adding a catalogue is thus to create this package, and
tell the Reahl component infrastructure where to find it. In our
example, create the `i18nexamplemessages` package in the top level
directory of the component. (Remember that a Python package is only a
Python package when it contains a file called `__init__.py`.) To
inform the Reahl component infrastructure where to find the package
containing translation catalogues in your component, you need to add a
``<translations>`` tag to the `.reahlproject` file of your component
which names this "translations" package of your component:

.. literalinclude:: ../../reahl/doc/examples/tutorial/i18nexample/.reahlproject
   :start-after: <project type="egg">
   :end-before: <deps purpose="run">

.. note::

   Remember to always run ``reahl setup -- develop -N`` after changing
   a `.reahlproject` file in order to update the project metadata.

Once a "translations" package is named, you can create a catalogue of
user messages found in your component by running the following from
inside the root directory of your component::

  reahl extractmessages


Supplying translations to another component
-------------------------------------------

At this point, our example is translatable. That means that anyone can
make it support a new locale by adding translations of our user
messages to the natural language of the needed locale. These new
translations can be added in a totally different component without
touching the original component at all, but nothing prevents us from
adding a set of translations in the original component either.

In this example, the latter approach is taken because it keeps
everything nicely together in a single egg, simplifying our example
infrastructure somewhat. Whether you choose to provide translations
inside the original component, or in a different one, the process is
the same.

If you do provide translations for egg A in egg B, it is advisable to
let egg B depend on the particular version of egg A for which it
provides translations. Different versions of egg A may have a
different set of user messages to translate, meaning different
versions of your egg B!

Also, you can only provide translations in a component once you have
notified the Reahl component infrastructure in which package to look
for language catalogues in your component. Since we have already added
a ``<translations>`` tag to the `.reahlproject` file of `i18nexample`
this has already been taken care of.

Adding a translation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To add a translation to the current component for the `af` locale, for
i18nexample, run the following command inside the top-level directory
of i18nexample::

  reahl addlocale af i18nexample

Running this command creates the following directory structure inside
the "translations" package mentioned before::

  ├── i18nexamplemessages
  │   ├── af
          └── LC_MESSAGES
              └── i18nexample.po

The file you are interested in is af/LC_MESSAGES/i18nexample.po. This
is a text file which lists each user message originating from the
i18nexample component. (Look for the strings labelled msgid.)
Underneath each message (see the msgstr labels), you can now supply
the Afrikaans translation of each message in this file.

Once you are satisfied with all your translations, the catalogue has
to be compiled before it can be used by a running application. To do
this, run the following from the top level directory of the component
which contains the new catalogue::

  reahl compiletranslations

This command compiles all translations found in the "translations"
package of the current component, regardless of language or which
component they are for.

.. warning::

   A Reahl application only supports a given locale if all the
   components it comprises of support that locale. Hence, when adding
   a new locale that is not supported by Reahl itself, you will have
   to provide the translations for your new locale for all of the
   Reahl components as well! Luckily you can do that easily, in your
   own component.

Maintaining translations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Software keeps changing. Chances are that newer versions of a
component for which you provide translations may contain a different
list of user messages than it had in a previous version. When this
happens the bulk of the messages already translated usually stay
unchanged, with a change or a new message here and there.

Running the following command updates all existing translations found
in the "translations" package of the current component, merging new
changes into the set of translations you already have::

  reahl mergetranslations




